### testing
-  Code testing refers to running each line of code with a controlled input, and verifying if it performs the expected output. The goal is to identify bugs or errors during the SDLC. While code documentation helps others to understand what you expect your code to do, testing guarantees that it meets these expectations.
- to ensure reliability, stability, and maintainability of software solutions.

### benefits:
1. Ensuring Reliability and Quality
2. less time spent working on hotfixes 😂💚
3. Preventing Regression: As applications evolve and new features are added, it's vital to ensure that existing functionality remains intact.
4. Enhancing Maintainability
5. Facilitating Collaboration: among Developers, Quality Assurance (QA) Engineers, and other project stakeholders. Essentially, when you write tests, they serve as a common language that enables you to communicate your intent and ensure that everyone is on the same page. 
6. Building User Confidence
7. Reducing Costs

### types of testing
1. **unit testing**: Unit Testing is the process of testing individual units of code, such as functions or classes.
2. **integeration testing**: Integration Testing refers to a type of Software Testing that focuses on verifying the interactions and communication between different components, modules, or subsystems of a software system, it helps uncover errors such as Incompatible interfaces, Incorrect data transfers, communication failures
3. **End-to-End testing**: End-to-end Testing verifies that your software works correctly from the beginning to the end of a particular user flow. It uses a production-equivalent environment, as well as, data to simulate real-world situations, and may also involve the integrations your software has with external applications.
- End-to-End Testing can be performed at various levels, including:
    - **Component Integration Testing**: checking the interactions between individual components or modules on a page.
    - **API Integration Testing**: testing the integration and functionality of APIs, verifying that they correctly handle requests, process data, and return the expected responses.
    - **Database Integration Testing**: interaction between the application and the database. It ensures that data is properly stored, retrieved, and updated, in addition to ensuring that the database schema aligns with the application's requirements.
    - **System Integration Testing**: he integration of all components and subsystems that make up the entire software system. It validates the end-to-end functionality, data flow, and interoperability of the system by simulating real-world scenarios and user interactions.

### Hitchhiker's guideToPython - testing
##### rules of testing
- A testing unit should focus on one tiny bit of functionality and prove it correct.
- Each test unit must be fully independent, Each test must be able to run alone, and also within the test suite, regardless of the order that they are called, The implication of this rule is that each test must be loaded with a fresh dataset and may have to do some cleanup afterwards. This is usually handled by setUp() and tearDown() methods.
- Try hard to make tests that run fast. If one single test needs more than a few milliseconds to run, development will be slowed down or the tests will not be run as often as is desirable. In some cases, tests can’t be fast because they need a complex data structure to work on, and this data structure must be loaded every time the test runs. Keep these heavier tests in a separate test suite that is run by some scheduled task, and run all other tests as often as needed.
- Learn your tools and learn how to run a single test or a test case. Then, when developing a function inside a module, run this function’s tests frequently, ideally automatically when you save the code.
- Always run the full test suite before a coding session, and run it again after. This will give you more confidence that you did not break anything in the rest of the code.
- It is a good idea to implement a hook that runs all tests before pushing code to a shared repository.
- If you are in the middle of a development session and have to interrupt your work, it is a good idea to write a broken unit test about what you want to develop next. When coming back to work, you will have a pointer to where you were and get back on track faster.
- The first step when you are debugging your code is to write a new test pinpointing the bug. While it is not always possible to do, those bug catching tests are among the most valuable pieces of code in your project.
- Use long and descriptive names for testing functions. The style guide here is slightly different than that of running code, where short names are often preferred. The reason is testing functions are never called explicitly. square() or even sqr() is ok in running code, but in testing code you would have names such as test_square_of_number_2(), test_square_negative_number(). These function names are displayed when a test fails, and should be as descriptive as possible.
- When something goes wrong or has to be changed, and if your code has a good set of tests, you or other maintainers will rely largely on the testing suite to fix the problem or modify a given behavior. Therefore the testing code will be read as much as or even more than the running code. A unit test whose purpose is unclear is not very helpful in this case.
- Another use of the testing code is as an introduction to new developers. When someone will have to work on the code base, running and reading the related testing code is often the best thing that they can do to start. They will or should discover the hot spots, where most difficulties arise, and the corner cases. If they have to add some functionality, the first step should be to add a test to ensure that the new functionality is not already a working path that has not been plugged into the interface.

### why do we write unittesting
- to test the functionality of our code e:i weather of not the code is working as expected and in this process we cand find bugs to fix

### Ref
- [blueLight](https://bluelight.co/blog/code-testing)
- [Hitchhiker's](https://docs.python-guide.org/writing/tests/)