### express-validators
#### importance of validating user inputs
1. **Prevention from Injection Attacks**: Consider a scenario where your application is vulnerable to SQL Injection attacks. This vulnerability arises due to the poor handling of SQL code during user authentication through an authentication form. An attacker can exploit this by passing some malicious SQL code instead of user credentials and gaining access to the server, which is game over for the application.

2. **Data Integrity and Consistency**: When user input is validated, it creates consistency in data being stored in servers, thus making it complicated to work with the data. For example, if a user can send text data in input for age, it creates inconsistency in the data stored in the server.

3. **Data Compatibility**: The data type must be consistent when data is used at various endpoints in a big organization. For instance, if users can enter garbage data instead of a proper email in their email credentials, it could cause complications when the organization needs to contact the user.

4. **Enhanced User Experience**: When inputs are validated, a developer can create logic to send appropriate and immediate feedback to users, allowing them to correct the invalid input they provided. This enhances the overall User Experience.

### important terms
1. **Validator** : A validator is a function that takes input and performs certain checks based on some criteria.

2. **Sanitizer** : A sanitizer is a function used to modify or cleanse input data to ensure that it is secure and adheres to required formats.

3. **Validation Chain** : A validation chain in Express-Validator is a sequence of validators or sanitizers applied on an input. For example, assume that you have a form where you want users to enter their email and, to keep your data in the database consistent, you want no whitespaces to be allowed in the input (at left or right ends). You can use a validation chain like .isEmail() to achieve this.trim() [You will learn about these in a later section]. This will first check whether the input is an email; if it is email data, then the trim() sanitizer will remove whitespaces from both ends of the input.

### express-validator
- Express-Validator is a combination of middleware which provides validators and sanitizers for string data types
- create middleware to validate the inputs every time a user signs up for your server.
```bash
npm install express-validator
```
```js
const { body, validationResult } = require("express-validator");
app.post(
  "/signup",
  // using validation to verify valid inputs (MIDDLEWARE)
  [
    [
      body("name").notEmpty(),
      body("email").isEmail(),
      body("password").notEmpty(),
    ],
  ],
  async (req, res) => {
    const errors = validationResult(req);

    if (!errors.isEmpty()) {
        return res.status(400).json({ errors: errors.array() });
      }

    res.status(200).json({success:'Successful Sign Up!'})
  }
);
```
- The `body()` method is used to create validation chains for validating and selecting input data from request payloads( req) from users, such as data sent by a POST request.
- The `validationResult()` method stores the result of a validation chain of an HTTP request as a JavaScript object. If this object is empty, it implies that the payload has passed all validation tests; if not, it stores information about the payload and the criteria it did not satisfy.
- The body() method of the Express-Validator fetches the values of HTML components having the name attribute same as the argument of the body() method; i.e., body(“password”) will fetch the value of HTML input component having the name attribute as password.
- Then, on these values, you can use the validators provided by Express-Validator. In this example, we have used two validators, isEmail() and notEmpty(). These validators determine whether the input is email and not empty, respectively. If the input does not match the criteria of the validator(s), the Express-Validator will throw an error as an object in the form of the validationResult(). However, if the input matches the criteria of the applied validators, the validationResult() object will be empty. This is then used inside the function definition of the ‘/signup’ route to create a simple check using if statement. Suppose the validationResult() array is not empty. In that case, an error with response code 400 is sent to the client.

### common validatros
- can be used in the same manner as isEmail() and notEmpty().
#### isDate()
#### isEmpty()
#### isHash(algorithm)
Checks if the Input is a hash. The argument takes the hashing algorithm such as MD5, SHA, etc.
#### isJWT()
Checks if the Input is a JWT(JavaScript Web Token).
#### isURL()
#### isBoolean()
#### isNumeric()
#### isAlphanumeric()
#### isInt()
#### isDecimal()
#### isFloat()

### validate file inputs 
- handle file inputs and validate them before uploading them to a server to avoid uploading malicious files on your server. In addition to this security benefit, you can put constraints on the file input size, ensuring no large files fill up your server.
- we will do that using multer packages
```bash
npm i multer
```
```js
const multer = require('multer')
```
```js
// CREATING MIDDLEWARE USING MULTER TO HANDLE UPLOADS
// creating a storage object for multer
const storage = multer.diskStorage({
  // providing the destinations for files to be stored in server
  destination: "./uploads/",
 });
```